>> Stephen: FOLKS,
MY FIRST GUEST IS AN INDEPENDENT
SENATOR FROM VERMONT WHO WANTS
TO BE OUR NEXT PRESIDENT.
PLEASE WELCOME SENATOR BERNIE
SANDERS!
( CHEERS AND APPLAUSE )
( BAND PLAYING )
>> Stephen: SIR, GOOD TO SEE
YOU, WELCOME BACK!
GOOD TO BE WITH YOU.
>> Stephen: ALWAYS NICE TO
HAVE YOU ON.
I'VE GOT TO SAY, YOU'RE LOOKING
SPREE, YOU'RE LOOKING GOOD, EVEN
THOUGH -- AND I WANT TO PUT THIS
UP, NOT TO BRING UP ANY BAD
MEMORIES OR ANYTHING -- YOU WERE
HERE IN SEPTEMBER LAST TIME AND
JUST DAYS AFTER YOU WERE HERE,
YOU HAD A HEART ATTACK.
I WANT TO APOLOGIZE FOR HOW
TOUGH I WAS ON YOU.
( LAUGHTER )
THAT'S WHAT HAPPENED.
GILLIBRAND WAS HER AND HER
KIDNEYS FAILED.
>> I KNOCKED ON WOOD THAT NIGHT.
TURNS OUT, THIS IS PLASTIC.
>> Stephen: IT IS.
IT IS.
I APOLOGIZE TO YOU AGAIN.
IT'S NOT YOUR FAULT.
OKAY.
THERE'S A LOT TO TALK ABOUT IN
THE WORLD AND THE CAMPAIGN.
I'D LIKE TO START OFF WITH THE
RECENT POSSIBLY WAR WITH IRAN.
THE UNITED STATES, JUST TO
RECAP, WE SENT A DRONE STRIKE AT
THE PRESIDENT'S COMMAND TO KILL
HEAD OF THE QUDS FORCE QASEM
SOLEIMANI.
NIKKI HALEY HAS SAID THE ONLY
PEOPLE MOURNING SOLEIMANI ARE
DEMOCRATIC LEADERS.
HAVE YOU SEEN ANY DEMOCRATIC
LEADERS MOURNING SOLEIMANI?
ARE YOU MOURNING SOLEIMANI?
ANYTHING YOU'D LIKE TO SAY BACK
WITH NIKKI HALEY RIGHT NOW,
PERHAPS WITH A FRAGRANT GESTURE?
( LAUGHTER )
>> NO, NOBODY I KNOW IS MOURNING
SOLEIMANI, BUT I TELL YOU WHAT,
YOU KNOW, STEPHEN, I THINK ABOUT
THE MODERN HISTORY OF THIS
COUNTRY, AND I REMEMBER VIETNAM,
THAT WAS MY GENERATION, AND I
REMEMBER THE WAR IN IRAQ.
THOSE ARE THE TWO WORST FOREIGN
POLICY BLUNDERS IN THE MODERN
HISTORY OF THIS COUNTRY, AND
BOTH OF THOSE WARS WERE BUILT ON
LIES.
( APPLAUSE )
>> Stephen: I JUST WANT TO
POINT OUT THAT CANDIDATE TRUMP
AGREED WITH YOU.
>> YEAH, WELL --
>> Stephen: CANDIDATE TRUMP
AGREED THAT IRAQ WAS THE WORST
DECISION.
>> YEAH, BUT HERE'S THE POINT --
THE POINT IS THAT BOTH OF THOSE
WARS WHICH CAUSED SUCH
INCREDIBLE SUFFERING IN OUR
COUNTRY -- 59,000 AMERICAN
SOLDIERS DEAD AS A RESULT OF THE
VIETNAM WAR, PROBABLY MORE DIED
AFTER THEY CAME BACK, A
GENERATION REALLY ENORMOUSLY
IMPACTED.
THE WAR IN IRAQ, 4500 OF OUR
PEOPLE, HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
IRAQIS DEAD.
WE SPENT TRILLIONS OF DOLLARS
THAT SHOULD BE INVESTED IN
HEALTHCARE, IN EDUCATION, IN
INFRASTRUCTURE.
( CHEERS AND APPLAUSE )
TRILLIONS OF DOLLARS SPENT IN
THAT WAR BASED ON A LAW YOU
REMEMBER.
YOU REMEMBER IT VERY WELL.
>> Stephen: SURE, YEAH.
YEAH.
WE WERE TOLD -- WE WERE TOLD
THAT SADDAM HAD MASS WEAPONS OF
MASS DESTRUCTION, CHEMICAL
WEAPONS TIED INTO AL QUAIDA, ALL
ALIKE, AND ALL OF THAT
SUFFERING.
AT THE END OF ALL OF THAT, ALL
OF THE DEATH, ALL OF THE
SUFFERING, TRILLIONS OF DOLLARS
OF EXPENDITURES, WE GET BOOTED
OUT OF IRAQ, THEY NO LONGER WANT
US THERE.
SO I WILL DO EVERYTHING THAT I
CAN TO STOP A WAR WITH IRAN THAT
I THINK WILL BE A DISASTER.
( CHEERS AND APPLAUSE )
>> Stephen: THE
ADMINISTRATION, AS YOU WAS
TALKING ABOUT EARLIER IN THE
SHOW, THE ADMINISTRATION SENT
REPRESENTATIVES BOTH IN THE
MILITARY AND FROM THE CABINET TO
HAVE A BRIEFING AT THE SENATE
YESTERDAY.
WERE YOU AT THESE BRIEFINGS?
>> YES.
>> Stephen: MIKE LEE CALLED
THESE INSULTING.
DID YOU FIND THEM INSULTING?
>> WELL, I AM SO USED TO TRUMP
THAT I -- YOU KNOW, AND HIS
ADMINISTRATION THAT NOTHING
SURPRISES ME.
( LAUGHTER )
>> Stephen: ISN'T THAT PART OF
THE DANGER OF THIS
ADMINISTRATION THAT WE'RE
BECOMING DEAFENED TO THE LIES.
>> YES.
AND MIKE LEE IS A CONSERVATIVE
REPUBLICAN WITH WHOM I DISAGREE
WITH ON ALMOST EVERYTHING BUT HE
AND I HAD WORKED TOGETHER
BECAUSE MIKE IS MAYBE OLD
FASHIONED ENOUGH TO BELIEVE IN
THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED
STATES.
( CHEERS AND APPLAUSE )
I KNOW THAT IS SOMETHING -- AND
THAT IS SOMETHING THAT TRUMP I
THINK HAS NOT YET READ OR
UNDERSTANDS.
( LAUGHTER )
BUT WHAT MIKE MADE PUBLIC
TODAY -- WHICH IS TRUE, I WAS
THERE, IN FACT, SIGNATURE RIGHT
BEHIND HIM -- WHEN ASKED BY THE
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MILITARY
AND THE C.I.A. IF, IN FACT,
TRUMP DECIDES TO ASSASSINATE THE
LEADERSHIP -- THE LEADER -- OF
IRAN, WOULD HE HAVE TO COME TO
CONGRESS FOR AUTHORIZATION, AND
THEY COULD NOT GIVE A CLEAR
ANSWER ON THAT.
AND HERE IS THE POINT THAT I
KNOW THAT EVERYBODY KNOWS THIS,
THE CONSTITUTION IS EXTREMELY
CLEAR, IT IS THE CONGRESS OF
UNITED STATES THAT HAS WARMAKING
POWERS, NOT THE PRESIDENT.
( APPLAUSE )
AND THAT IS WHY I HAVE
INTRODUCED LEGISLATION WHICH
WOULD PREVENT SPENDING -- GIVING
TRUMP ONE NICKEL OF MONEY TO GO
TO WAR IN IRAN, AND THERE'S
ANOTHER GOOD PIECE OF
LEGISLATION THAT, ONCE AGAIN,
WOULD BRING UP THE WAR POWERS
ACT TO MAKE SURE THAT HE COULD
NOT GO TO WAR UNLESS HE HAD THE
AUTHORIZATION OF THE CONGRESS.
( CHEERS AND APPLAUSE )
>> Stephen: IT HAS BEEN A LONG
TIME, AND CORRECT ME IF I'M
WRONG HERE, BUT IT HAS BEEN A
LONG TIME SINCE CONGRESS HAS
EXERTED THAT POWER.
HOW DO YOU THINK WE GOT HERE
WHERE TRUMP THINKS HE CAN ACT
WITH SUCH IMPUNITY?
>> YOU'RE ABSOLUTELY RIGHT, AND
IT IS UNFORTUNATE SITUATION THAT
THAT HAS EXISTED, AND I'LL TELL
YOU WHAT I THINK THE ANSWER IS,
YOU KNOW, AND I'VE GOT TO SAY
THIS.
IT IS A POLITICIAN, THE
PRESIDENT GETS UP THERE, WE'RE
GOING TO BE TOUGH, THESE ARE
EVIL GUYS, WE'RE GOING TO WAR,
WOW!
YOUR POLL RATINGS GO UP!
AND PEOPLE SAY, WAIT A MINUTE,
WHAT ARE THE UNINTENDED
CONSEQUENCES OF THAT?
HOW MANY PEOPLE WILL DIE?
HOW MUCH IS IT GOING TO COST US?
OH, CANDIDATE X OR CONGRESSMAN X
IS SOFT ON TERROR.
YOU KNOW, CONGRESSMAN X, HE
DOESN'T WANT TO PROTECT AMERICA,
ALL RIGHT, AND I REALLY GET VERY
ANGRY AT THAT APPROACH, BECAUSE
WE SIT IN THE CONGRESS IN OUR
BEAUTIFUL ROOMS, BEAUTIFUL
STUDIO OVER HERE, AND WE DO NOT
KNOW WHAT WAR IS ABOUT.
WE DIVERT THE FORMER CHAIRMAN OF
THE SENATE COMMITTEE ON VETERANS
AFFAIRS.
I MET WITH THE MOTHERS OF THE
YOUNG MEN WHO LOST THEIR LIVES
IN THE WAR, MET WITH THE WIVES,
MET WITH THE KIDS, I MET WITH
THE SOLDIERS WHO CAME BACK
WITHOUT ARMS AND LEGS, WHO ARE
DEALING WITH PTSD TODAY.
WAR IS A HORROR, AND IT'S TIME
POLITICIANS UNDERSTOOD THAT
WE'VE GOT TO DO EVERYTHING
HUMANLY POSSIBLE TO AVOID WAR.
( CHEERS AND APPLAUSE )
AND I'VE GOT TO SAY, STEPHEN,
YOU KNOW, I HAVE TO SAY THAT I
KNOW IT IS NOT SEXY TO TALK
ABILITY DIPLOMACY, IT IS NOT
SEXY TO TALK ABOUT MAKING SURE
THAT WE HAVE A GREAT STATE
DEPARTMENT WITH PEOPLE WHO KNOW
THE CULTURE AND THE LANGUAGE OF
COUNTRIES ALL OVER THE WORLD.
I'VE MET SOME OF THE PEOPLE,
THEY DO A GREAT JOB.
IT AIN'T SEXY.
IT IS MUCH MORE POWERFUL, IT'S
BETTER TV TO TALK ABOUT HOW
WE'RE GOING TO KILL THIS ONE AND
KILL THAT ONE.
BUT I BELIEVE THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE ARE SICK AND TIRED OF END
LESS WARS, THEY WANT TO IMPROVE
LIVES FOR THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
AND, YOU KNOW --
( CHEERS AND APPLAUSE )
>> Stephen: SOME PEOPLE
JUSTIFYING THIS ARE POINTING AT
THE AUMF OF 2002.
>> RIGHT.
>> Stephen: THE AUTHORIZATION
OF USE OF MILITARY FORCE
FOLLOWING THE ATTACKS OF 9/11.
>> RIGHT.
>> Stephen: I READ THE TEXT
THE OTHER NIGHT, IT SPECIFICALLY
SAYS YOU CAN ONLY GO AFTER
PEOPLE -- YOU'RE AUTHORIZED TO
GO AFTER PEOPLE, THE PRESIDENT,
IS AND THIS PRESIDENT AS WELL,
TO GO AFTER PEOPLE WHO WERE
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE ATTACKS OR
WHO AIDED IN THOSE ATTACKS.
AND THE 9/11 COMMISSION SAID
THERE WAS NO CONNECTION WITH
IRAN.
>> RIGHT.
>> Stephen: SO HOW CAN THEY
STILL JUSTIFY USING THAT?
>> BECAUSE YOU HAVE -- YOU KNOW,
YOU'RE RAISING THE RIGHT
QUESTION.
>> Stephen: THANK YOU.
( LAUGHTER )
>> YOU HAVE AN ADMINISTRATION
WHICH IS LED BY A PRESIDENT WHO
IS A PATHOLOGICAL LIAR.
( APPLAUSE )
HONESTLY, STEPHEN, I DISAGREE
WITH MANY MEMBERS IN CONGRESS,
THEY'RE NOT PATHOLOGICAL LIARS,
BUT THIS PRESIDENT, HONESTLY, IN
MY VIEW, DOES NOT UNDERSTAND THE
CONSTITUTION, DOES NOT RESPECT
THE RULE OF LAW, IS NOT
PARTICULARLY INTERESTED IN
DEMOCRATIC PROCEDURES, AND THAT
IS WHY I CONSIDER HIM TO BE THE
MOST DANGEROUS PRESIDENT IN THE
MODERN HISTORY OF THIS COUNTRY,
AND I INTEND TO DEFEAT THIS
PRESIDENT.
( CHEERS AND APPLAUSE )
>> Stephen: IF YOU DO -- LET'S
SAY YOU DO, SOME PEOPLE SAY THIS
PRESENT EXCHANGE IS OVER, OTHERS
SAY IRAN IS GOING TO TAKE THEIR
TIME AND COULD BE MONTHS OR
YEARS DOWN THE LINE.
IF YOU DO WIN, HOW DOES
PRESIDENT SANDERS RESPOND TO
IRANIAN AGGRESSION, THE BOMBING
OF OIL FIELDS IN SAUDI ARABIA,
SPONSORING OF TERROR, HEZBOLLAH,
WHAT DO YOU DO IN RESPONSE TO
THAT?
>> I TELL YOU WHAT WE DO, WHAT
WE DO IS UNDERSTAND WE HAVE A
VERY VOLATILE REGION, THAT, FOR
MANY, MANY YEARS, THE UNITED
STATES HAS SIDED WITH
SAUDI ARABIA, LED BY MOHAMMED
BIN SALMAN WHO IS A MURDERER AND
A DEMAGOGUE.
HE IS OUR ALLY.
I THINK WHAT WE DO IS USE OUR
DIPLOMATIC POWER AND OUR
RESOURCES TO DEMAND THESE
PEOPLE, WHETHER THEY LIKE IT OR
NOT, ARE GOING TO SIT IN A ROOM
AND THEY'RE GOING TO START
WORKING OUT THE DIFFERENCES THEY
HAVE BECAUSE I THINK THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE ARE TIRED OF
GETTING SUCKED INTO WARS THAT
ARE A RESULT OF THEIR
DIFFERENCES.
>> Stephen: BUT THE
DIFFERENCES ARE JUST NOT
POLITICAL DIFFERENCES, THEY'RE
ALSO RELIGIOUS DIFFERENCES
BECAUSE THE UNITED STATES IS
TAKE SIDES NOW IN A SUNNI-SHIA
DIVIDE THAT HAS GONE ON FOR
YEARS.
>> WE HAVE BEEN THE ALLIES OF
SAUDI ARABIA SINCE WAY BACK WHEN
AND I THINK THE PEOPLE
UNDERSTAND THE LEADERSHIP OF
SAUDI ARABIA MURDERED JOURNALIST
JAMAL KHASHOGGI, CUT HIM UP.
THEY WILL CRUSH ANYBODY WHO
FIGHTS DEMOCRACY FOR
SAUDI ARABIA, INCLUDES WOMEN WHO
ARE THIRD-CLASS CITIZENS.
I'M NOT SUGGESTING ANY OF THIS
STUFF IS EASY, IT IS NOT.
BUT WE'VE GOT TO USE OUR
DIPLOMATIC POWER, OUR FINANCIAL
CARROTS AND STICKS TO GET PEOPLE
TOGETHER, NOT ONLY BETWEEN
SAUDI ARABIA AND IRAN, BUT THE
ISRAELIS AND PALESTINIANS, GET
PEOPLE TOGETHER AROUND THE WORLD
WHO ARE IN CONFLICT AND SEE WHAT
ROLE WE CAN PLAY IN TRYING TO
AVOID WAR.
>> Stephen: WHAT IS YOUR BAR
FOR MILITARY ACTION?
>> LOOK, THERE ARE TIMES WHEN WE
MAY WELL USE.
WE HAVE THE GREATEST MILITARY IN
THE WORLD, AND THERE ARE TIMES
WHEN WE MAY WELL HAVE TO USE
THAT MILITARY.
BUT I BELIEVE THAT MILITARY
ACTION SHOULD BE THE LAST
RESPONSE, NOT THE FIRST
RESPONSE.
( APPLAUSE )
>> Stephen: SENATOR, WE HAVE
TO TAKE A QUICK BREAK.
IF YOU CAN STICK AROUND, YOU
STICK AROUND BECAUSE WE'LL BE
RIGHT BACK WITH MORE SENATOR
BENDERS, EVERYBODY.